# ecoinvent Database

> The ecoinvent Database is a Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) database that supports various types of sustainability
assessments.


The ecoinvent Database enables users to gain a deeper understanding of the environmental impacts of their products and
services. It is a repository covering a diverse range of sectors on global and regional level. It currently contains
more than 18’000 activities, otherwise referred to as ‘datasets’, modelling human activities or processes. ecoinvent
datasets contain information on the industrial or agricultural process they model, measuring the natural resources
withdrawn from the environment, the emissions released to the water, soil and air, the products demanded from other
processes (electricity), and of course, the products, co-products and wastes produced.

## Content

The ecoinvent database contains around 18’000 reliable life cycle inventory datasets, covering a range of sectors. These
include agriculture and animal husbandry, building and construction, chemicals and plastics, energy, forestry and wood,
metals, textiles, transport, touristic accommodation, waste treatments and recycling, and water supply, among other
industrial sectors.

Each activity in the ecoinvent Database is attributed a geographic location. Geographic locations, otherwise referred to
as ‘geographies‘, are reported using internationally accepted abbreviations as part of the dataset’s name. As the
ecoinvent Database is a background database, the aim is to cover activities in the most relevant geographies for the
selected product or service. At the same time, geographic coverage is dependent on data quality and availability. Thus,
almost every activity in the database features a dataset representing the process globally, meaning the average global
production.

For each dataset in the ecoinvent Database, Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) scores for several impact assessment
methods (such as “IPCC 2013”, “EF v3.0”, or “ReCiPe”) and corresponding impact categories (such as “climate change”,
“human toxicity”, “water use”, or “land use”) are available.

The structure of the database allows users to trace the impacts of their products throughout the supply chain and
understand their results. Moreover, it grants flexibility as it allows different uses of the data depending on the
users’ needs. Apart from the LCIA scores for individual products, users may, for example, also be interested in emission
profiles; bills of materials; material flows; mass, water and carbon accounts; or average technology mixes.

## Transparency & Traceability

The ecoinvent Database stands for transparency and traceability. Datasets are provided as individual unit process data
and comprehensive documentation for all aspects of the database is available. Furthermore, annual reports are published
that document changes to the database. On top of this, the database offers extensive information underlying the computed
environmental impacts. Specifically, it includes information about the properties of products, access to parameters and
mathematical formulas behind datapoints and clarity about their uncertainty.

## Data Quality Guideline

This data quality guideline describes the methodology behind the modelling of the ecoinvent Database. It contains
information on the applied LCA methodology, the general structure of the database, specific guidelines for data
submission, a description of the review process, as well as a detailed description of the system models.
